# Programming for Data Analysis ATU 22/23 - Project 1

# Author: David Higgins G00411302
This repository will contain a Jupyter notebook containing my submission for Project 1 of this module. This code was written using Python 3.9.7 in the Python Anaconda distribution (available [here](https://www.anaconda.com/products/distribution)) and requires the use of the following packages: 

-Numpy
-Pandas
-SkLearn
-Scipy
-Random
-Matplotlib

I will synthesise a dataset that represents the survivability of mountaineers on Mt. Everest. I will begin my research using the Mt. Everest Ascent dataset generated by Roshan Pandey on Kaggle. The commercialisation of climbing Everest has become increasingly controversial in recent years. Growing crowds of inexperienced mountaineers on the mountain and an upsurge in attempts being made without oxygen have been blamed for increasing death rates in recent seasons. I will look at the subset of mountaineers who successfully summitted and examine what variables impact on their survival.

One of the initial tasks was to consider if all the data contained in Pandey's dataset was relevant to my model. My synthetic dataset would represent a typical year on Everest in the very near future. As such, the majority of climbers would be on commercial expeditions supported by Sherpa and Western guides. This type of climbing really began on Everest in 1985 when an American businessman, Dick Bass, was guided to the summit by David Breashears as part of his attempt to climb the Seven Summits, the highest peaks on each continent. I am only going to consider the data from 1985 onwards to get a better approximation of the behaviour of clients on commerical expeditions. Prior to this, mountaineers attempting Everest would be professional climbers and generally members of national or sponsored expeditions. The dataframe, df, is set to include only the rows of data for 1985 onwards.

One of the first aspects of the synthetic dataset I generate is the number of summitters for that particular year, N. By using the unique() method on the Year column, I was able to create an array with the list of years. Then using the groupby method with Year as the argument on the dataframe df, I counted the number of summitters for each year from 1985 to 2020. I used these two arrays to train a linear regression model which then predicted the number of climbers in 2023.

Next I created used the Age Data Series to determine the mean and standard deviation of the cohort of summitters we are interested in. Plotting a histogram of the values of the Data Series showed they were reasonably normally distributed, if a little right skewed. Using the mean and standard deviation of the Data Series, I was able to generate a normally distributed array of 673 numbers using Numpy's normal method. The shape of that histogram corresponds well to the shape of the historical age data so it will be a suitable distribution to use for the synthethic age data. 

Considering the use of oxygen, I used the historical rate of summits using no oxygen as an input for the binomial method. Since we are looking at a binary choice, the binomial distribution is a suitable way of generating a synthetic set of choices to use oxygen or not.

I calculated the probabilities of climbing in a particular season, again based on what was done historically. I used the random package to generate a list of random choices of season where the weights assigned were the probabilities previously calculated.

The final aspect I had to look at was whether the climber survived the descent. I considered the use of oxygen and the season climbed in to be the determining factors so again looked at the historical rates of survival based on those conditions. I defined a function, everestFunction, that would use a binomial distribution to assign a death or survival depending on the season and oxygen use of each of the climbers in the synthetic dataset. The function also assigned these values to a list of lists as they were generated. Finally the list was converted to a Pandas Dataframe to allow it to be used for further analysis/machine learning.

I had attempted to use the sklearn algorithm, K nearest neighbours, to determine the death or survival of each climber. As much of the data I used to train the model was discrete and binary, it invariably gave a survival result for every climber. I reverted to the use of the binomial distribution as it was much better fit for discrete data.


## References
(https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/ropandey12/mount-everest-ascent-data-19532020)
(https://scikit-learn.org/stable/auto_examples/linear_model/plot_ols.html#sphx-glr-download-auto-examples-linear-model-plot-ols-py)
